 
Black Lives Matter: Making the System more Stable
In this post I'll try my best to articulate my personal view on the potential negative cause-effect-relations that Black Lives Matter (BLM) may have, and how we might solve racism completely.
While black lives does matter, obviously, there may be economic, and structural problems associated with the details of the execution. The first sign of this was that after less than two weeks of protesting - mostly peaceful at the time - we started seeing the emerges of "All Lives Matter". Followed by a spike in looting and domestic violence, not just in the US, but also in Canada.
With that being said, having lived in Montreal for the past 10 months, I am extremely impressed with the shear amount of effect I see individuals make in supporting BLM. I hope to add my support by highlighting some of the potential structural risks of the movement itself, rather then debating about whether black lives actually matters or not. If you are still in doubt as to whether black lives matter. Close this tab (CTRL-W on my laptop).
I believe in order to overcome the situation from escalating we have to make sure we understand the ripple effects that can emanate from these complex belief systems.
Complex Systems
The best example I know that gives insights into the functioning of a complex system is with the following situation. It suffices for an intransigent minority to reach a minutely small level, say three or four percent of the total population, for the entire population to have to submit to their preferences. Further, an optical illusion comes with the dominance of the minority: a naive observer would be under the impression that the choices and preferences are those of the majority. If it seems absurd, it is because our scientific intuitions aren't calibrated for that.
The main idea behind complex systems is that the ensemble behaves in way not predicted by the components. The interactions matter more than the nature of the units. Studying individual ants will never give us an idea on how the ant colony operates. For that, one needs to understand an ant colony as an ant colony, no less, no more, not a collection of ants. This is called an "emergent" property of the whole, by which parts and whole differ because what matters is the interactions between such parts. And interactions can obey very simple rules. The rule we discuss in this section is the minority rule.
The minority rule can simply be summarized as follow:
Someone with a peanut allergy will not eat products that touch peanuts but a person without such allergy can eat items without peanut traces in them.
Which explains why it is so hard to find peanuts on airplanes and why schools are peanut-free (which, in a way, increases the number of persons with peanut allergies as reduced exposure is one of the causes behind such allergies).
A probabilistic argument in favor of the minority rule dictating societal values is as follows. Wherever you look across societies and histories, you tend to find the same general moral laws prevailing, with some, but not significant, variations: do not steal; do not hunt orphans for pleasure; do not gratuitously beat up passers by for training, use instead a boxing bags, and similar interdicts. And we can see these rules evolving over time to become more universal, expanding to a broader set, to progressively include slaves, other tribes, other species (animals, economists), etc.One property of these laws: they are black-and-white, binary, discrete, and allow no shadow. You cannot steal "a little bit" or murder "moderately". You cannot keep Kosher and eat "just a little bit" of pork on Sunday barbecues.
Now it would be vastly more likely that these values emerged from a minority that the majority. Why? Take the following two theses:
Outcomes are paradoxically more stable under the minority rule - the variance of the results is lower and the rule is more likely to be emerge independently across populations.
What emerges from the minority rule is more likely to be black-and-white.

An example. Consider that an evil person wants to poison the collective by putting some product into soda cans. He has two options. The first is cyanide, which obeys a minority rule: a drop of poison (higher than a small threshold) makes the entire liquid poisonous. The second is a "majority"-style poison; it requires more than half the liquid to be poisonous in order to kill. Now look at the inverse problem, a collection of dead people after a dinner party, and you need to investigate the cause. The local Sherlock Holmes would assert that conditional on the outcome that all people drinking the soda having been killed, the evil man opted for the first not the second option. Simply, the majority rule leads to fluctuations around the average, with a high rate of survival.
The black-and-white character of these societal laws can be explained with the following. Assume that under a certain regime, when you mix white and dark blue in various combinations, you don't get variations of light blue, but dark blue. Such a regime is vastly more likely to produce dark blue than another rule that allows more shades of blue.
Looking at the riots against police brutality and the re-emerges of the BLM movement. It can be observed that the majority of damage and harm are caused by a select few. Applying the concept of the minority rule it rises concern for how far this "select few" can push the entire system to a breaking point. With system in the case being the US political system, the stability of the US dollar (we have already seen 10% inflation), or to some extend the entirety of western democracy.
Many people tend to ignore these asymmetric tail risks, because their believe system revolves around the majority rule. This will cause the majority of people to ignore the problem, causing this tail risk to increase until a breaking point is reached. This is also knows as a Black Swan event.
Conclusion
The entire growth of society, whether economic or moral, comes from a small number of people. So we close this section with a remark about the role of skin in the game in the condition of society. Society doesn't evolve by consensus, voting, majority, committees, verbose meeting, academic conferences, and polling; only a few people suffice to disproportionately move the needle. All one needs is an asymmetric rule somewhere. And asymmetry is present in about everything.
Metal Model
A heuristic is a technique to approach a problem that does not have a
concrete solution. Heuristics are principles to implement methods to create a close to optimal solution when dealing with a certain level of uncertainty.
To create a set of heuristics to understand any complex system, we have to define that type of logic to use. Typically, logical reasoning can be divided into two separate categories; inductive and deductive.
Deductive logic implies applying general rules which hold over the entirety of a closed domain of discourse.
Engineers are prone to use deductive reasoning to deduce concrete solutions to physically measurable problems. Sociopolitical problems cannot always be solved deductively, since they have more hidden variables.
Inductive logic is inherently uncertain, the results concluded from inductive
reasoning is more nuanced than simple stating; if this, then that.
Assuming we cannot come to a concrete conclusion, we can systematize a concept by applying risk management; using inductive reasoning to abstract nuances and deduce heuristics to create a more elegant transition from one set of beliefs to another.
Coming from South Africa, the country with the highest GINI index in the world, I am all in favor of BLM. The problem however does not lie with the BLM concept. Rather, it lies with the process of transitioning and integrating BLM smoothly into our economic and cultural systems. A naive individual will tell you that its as simple as having you voice heard. If it was that simple #BlackLivesMatter - which started in 2013 - would have been the nail in the coffin.
Survival comes first, science later
In other words, you do not need science to survive (we've done it for several hundred million years) , but you need to survive to do science. This precedence is well understood by traders and people in the real world (unlike in academia). Those who take risks have their priorities firmer than vague textbook notions such as "truth".
What do we mean by "survival"? Let's define the survival of animate and inanimate objects: I have a finite shelf life; my survival is not as important as that of things that do not have a limited life expectancy, such as mankind or planet earth. Hence the more "systemic", the more important such a survival becomes. The survival of a belief system can be considered more important than that of any individual. The death of George Floyd is a good example of this. As even after hes death has changed America forever. Next let us develop the following three points:
Judging people on their beliefs is not scientific
There is no such thing as "rationality" of a belief, there is rationality of action
The rationality of an action can only be judged by evolutionary considerations

The axiom of revelation of preferences states the following: you will not have an idea about what people really think, what predicts people's actions, merely by asking them –they themselves don't know. What matters, in the end, is what they pay for goods, not what they say they "think" about them, or what are the reasons they give you or themselves for that.
For beliefs are … cheap talk. A foundational principle of decision theory is that what goes on in the head of people isn't the business of science. First, what they think may not be measurable enough to lend itself to some scientific investigation. Second, it is not testable. Finally, there may be some type of a translation mechanism too hard for us to understand, with distortions at the level of the process that are actually necessary for think to work.
Actually, by a mechanism, called the bias-variance trade-off, you often get better results making some type of "errors", as when you aim slightly away from the target when shooting. In some cases by making some types of errors is the most rational thing to do, as, when the errors are of little costs, it leads to gains and discoveries. A concept known as Antifragile: Systems that gain from imperfections or applied stressors; up to a certain point.
This is why I have been against the State dictating to us what we "should" be doing: only evolution knows if the "wrong" thing is really wrong, provided there is skin in the game.
In South Africa, the white population decreased from approximately 15% in 1994 to around 7% in 2018. Yet the majority of South Africans still believe they have to push out the minority white people.
Most successful institutions in South Africa are also ran by the minority whites, which is still keeping the South African economy from completely collapsing. In the decade after Apartheid ended, the conclusion might have been drawn that this is because of the spillover-effect of the white-privileged system that was setup before 1994. However, almost 3 decades later (a generation is considered to be 27 years), one has to ask is this still the case? While 72% of whites still run the private sector and 73% of blacks run the public sector this may at first look like a racial disparity. However, with the white population left to defend for themselves, since they have become the oppressed minority. They have been forced to take more risk in order to survive. This has lead to a cultural divide among the whites in South Africa:
One where you have 30 year old men hide under the roofs of their parents, whom have largely preserved their wealth from Apartheid years.
And one where you have a minority of hyper-industrious individuals fighting for survival. These hyper-efficient graduates typically left for more stable countries like Australia and Canada. Leaving only the weak and old behind.

This systemic defect is what has caused the South African currency (ZAR) to devalue with 30% in the first quarter of 2020. Resulting in more culture pressure being applied on the minority whites in South Africa in order to try and strengthen the economy. Leading to more racial unrest, by creating a belief around statistics like; 73% of the private sector are still run by white men. What many of these statistic fail to mention is that more than 70% of these "white supremacy males" are over the age of 50.
As a generation shift is happening, and the Baby Boomers are retiring, you start to get inefficiencies sneaking into the private sector, which causes a negative feedback-loop as the industrious young has left the country.
Conclusion
Concluding this section it is also rational to see things differently from the "way they are", for improved performance. It is also difficult to map beliefs to reality. A decorative or instrumental belief can be rational if it leads to an increased survival.
Religion
It is of my opinion that religion is here to enforce tail risk management across generations, as its binary and unconditional rules are easy to teach and enforce. We have survived in spite of tail risks; our survival cannot be that random.
Skin in the game means that you do not pay attention to what people say, only to what they do, and how much of their neck they are putting on the line. Let survival work its wonders. Now what people say may have a purpose –it is not just what they think it means. Opinions are cheap unless people take risks for them.
Extending such logic, we can show that much of what we call "belief" is some kind of background furniture for the human mind, more metaphorical than real. The first principle we make:
There is a difference between beliefs that are decorative and those that map to action.
There is no difference between them in words, except that the true difference reveals itself in risk taking, having something at stake, something one could lose in case one is wrong.

In other words, many people will have opinions or a specific believe system they have created from a set of random variables; the country they were born in, the financial stability they grew up in, or their personal life experiences. But creating a believe system based on rationalization is only half the work. The other half involves testing it by taking risks. By putting your skin in the game and observing what emerges from cross-cultural interactions.
One way of doing this is by leveraging language and social media to push your views into the world, by having conversations and getting feedback, and making adjustments along the way. Doing so you put your reputation on the line. You have something to lose.
Why beliefs always tends to converge to extremism
In this section I'd like to discuss why I believe the most valid and the most important beliefs in any specific time in human history always converges to extremism.
Just as systems learn from extremes, and for preparedness, calibrate themselves to withstand large shocks, so does the human body. Indeed, our body should be seen a risk management system meant to handle our environment, paying more attention to extremes than ordinary events, and disproportionally learning from these.
You will never get an idea of the strength of a bridge by driving several hundred cars on it, making sure they are all of different colors and makes, which would correspond to representative traffic. No, an engineer would subject it instead to a few multi-ton vehicles. You may not map all the risks, as heavy trucks will not show material fatigue, but you can get a solid picture of the overall safety.
Society generally has a set of beliefs circulating within itself. Much like the money supply of that economy. As a belief gains more popularity its spread widens at an accelerating pace. This is analogous to the velocity of money.
During economic contractions as societal unrest rises the velocity of belief in a given society increases. Generally, its the case that the belief with the most value or truth behind it gains most of the popularity, since it has probably been suppressed in the decades leading up to the economic reset. In fact, the rapid increase in the popularity of a belief system (as we saw with fascism during WW2) has to occur during an economic contraction, since it comes to flourishion from the cracks of the old system.
If we were to systematize a belief system into an abstract graph, much like a social network, we can apply Price's law that say:
The network strength increase with the square of the amount of nodes in the network.
In a belief system each individual represents a single node. Since the strength of a belief system increases with each added individual, during social unrest we see the strongest belief systems bubble to the top. And because network effects tend to have a winner-take-all effect. We tend to see a single belief system rise during an economic contraction. Destroying all or most other concepts of that era. At least for some period of time.
This bubble effect resulting in extremism. This is literally what we witnessed happening with the death of George Floyd which lead to exponential growth in the BLM concept. Dominating world media. And since BLM has been suppressed for decades, and with social media in 2020, the spread of this concept is unlike anything we have ever seen.
It's important to note that I'm in no way or form devaluing the BLM concept or any other concept. I'm simply trying to outline the evolutionary steps of a belief system. Referring back to the discussion about complex systems: as the network size increases, more nodes being added, the complexity of this network goes up exponentially. Looking at a complex network like BLM then becomes more like analyzing an ant colony, rather than just looking at a collection of ants.
Due to the rapid increase in the BLM network I'm of the opinion that we cannot look at the system with the same set of eyes as we did a month ago. This is a whole different beast. Risks that might have seem small a month ago has now blown up orders of magnitude. Referring to the "bridge analogy" above, I fear that the growth of the BLM system might have been to fast. Not giving society enough time to properly test how to integrate it.
Conclusions
In summary, the idea I'm trying to get over with this post is that although I'm for the BLM movement. I do fear that the extremism of the abstract concept can create tail risks, which can cause systemic blow-up. I'm of the opinion that the way to solve racism is to destroy the concept of racism completely. Meaning the network of the racism belief system, and derivatives thereof like BLM, becomes negligible small. Nor converges to zero.
If religion has taught us anything its that beliefs are more important than human lives. In this I find it ironic that the Black Lives Matter belief system, which has a lot of truth to it, could potentially lead to a cultural war if we don't focus of solving some of these hidden asymmetries that can cause systemic blow-up. Not just within the US, but also in other parts of the world.
