Langauge as a Symbiosis
The background of this sum up is from the Lecture of Terence McKenna: Ancestors from the Future.
Langauge is an incomplete enchantment. And that pushed to it's limits, langauge does not become something heard by the ears, but something seen with the eye. On the brink potentially, through the pharmacological re-engineering of ourselves and through studying the Shamanic states of mind, about to move into a domain where we see eachothers thoughts.
Now, normally when we conceive of telepathy we think of it as you hear what I think. Telepathy is you see what I mean. You see, telepathy is a function that goes on in the domain of seeing, not in hearing. And why this is important rather than just some weird psychic ability, is because our boundaries are base on our relationship to our langauge. If you couns see what I mean in fairly profound sense, you would become me. In a much more profound sense, that when you hear what I say.
Cause think about it for a minute. Anaylyse what normal ordinary communication is. I want to communicate with you. I consult my internal dictionary and I carefully choose words out of my dictionary and I string them together according to the rules of English syntax. If done in the correct order, I then activate my vocal apparatus. I impart a vibration. An accoustical wave onto the surrounding medium, which is air. This vibration moves accross space. It enters through the holes on both sides of your head as a pressure wave. You then analysing this incoming waveform, rush to your dictionary and you break this incoming wave signature and attempt to map it to words in your dictionary.
Now, if your dictionary and my dictionary are the same. Then you will, low-and-behold re-construct my tough, in the convenience of your brain-mind system. But notice the caveat slipped in there; 'If your dictionary and my dictionary are the same.' But they never are. Well, maybe they are if you ask me the time, but if your talking about anything of interest, depth, ambiguity and complexity, then changes are your dictionary and my dictionary will only assimilate to congruency with eachother.
So then ambiguity creeps in. You think you understand me. I think you understand me. And on that shaky foundation we begin to build further semi-understandings and then we drift off in the general direction of misapprehension. Well, if you could see what I mean, there would be no ambiguity in our communication. The intension of langauge would be established in visual space with existential modality about it, similar to sculpture.
I would make it, but having made it, you and I would both examine it, walk around it and have the faith that we were looking at the same thing. And this would tend to erase our boundaries. So it's very clear that communication of the ordinary sorts; small mouth noisestransduced to cross accoustc space and symbolic notations there of. Have created the global civilation we are to confident in. 
